Description
Pain has been classified as “productive” pain and
“non-productive” pain. While this distinction has no
physiologic meaning, it may serve as a guide to treat-
ment. “Productive” pain has been described as a warning
of injury, and so may be both an indication of need for
treatment and a guide to diagnosis. “Non-productive”
pain by definition serves no purpose either as a warning
or diagnostic tool.
Although pain syndromes may be dissimilar, the
common factor is a sensory pathway from the affected
organ to the brain. Analgesics work at the level of the
nerves, either by blocking the signal from the peripheral
nervous system, or by distorting the interpretation by the
central nervous system. Selection of an appropriate anal-
gesic is based on consideration of the risk-benefit factors
of each class of drugs, based on type of pain, severity of
pain, and risk of adverse effects. Traditionally, pain has
been divided into two classes, acute and chronic,
although severity and projected patient survival are other
factors that must be considered in drug selection.
Acute pain
Acute pain is self limiting in duration, and includes
post-operative pain, pain of injury, and childbirth.
Because pain of these types is expected to be short term,
the long-term side effects of analgesic therapy may rou-
tinely be ignored. Thus, these patients may safely be
treated with narcotic analgesics without concern for their
addictive potential, or NSAIDs with only limited concern
for their ulcerogenic risks. Drugs and doses should be
adjusted based on observation of healing rate, switching
patients from high to low doses, and from narcotic anal-
gesics to non-narcotics when circumstances permit.
An important consideration of pain management in
severe pain is that patients should not be subject to the
return of pain. Analgesics should be dosed adequately to
assure that the pain is at least tolerable, and frequently
enough to avoid the anxiety that accompanies the antici-
pated return of pain. Analgesics should never be dosed on
a “prn” (as needed) basis, but should be administered often
enough to assure constant blood levels of analgesic. This
applies to both the narcotic and non-narcotic analgesics.
Chronic pain
Chronic pain, pain lasting over three months and
severe enough to impair function, is more difficult to
treat, since the anticipated side effects of the analgesics
are more difficult to manage. In the case of narcotic anal-
gesics this means the addiction potential, as well as res-
piratory depression and constipation. For the NSAIDs,
the risk of gastric ulcers may be dose limiting. While
some classes of drugs, such as the narcotic agonist/antag-
onist drugs bupronophine, nalbuphine and pentazocine,
and the selective COX-2 inhibitors celecoxib and rofe-
coxib represent advances in reduction of adverse effects,
they are still not fully suitable for long-term management
of severe pain. Generally, chronic pain management
requires a combination of drug therapy, life-style modifi-
cation, and other treatment modalities.
Narcotic analgesics
The narcotic analgesics, also termed opioids, are all
derived from opium. The class includes morphine,
codeine, and a number of semi-synthetics including
meperidine (Demerol), propoxyphen (Darvon) and oth-
ers. The narcotic analgesics vary in potency, but all are
effective in treatment of visceral pain when used in ade-
quate doses. Adverse effects are dose related. Because
these drugs are all addictive, they are controlled under
federal and state laws. A variety of dosage forms are
available, including oral solids, liquids, intravenous and
intrathecal injections, and transcutaneous patches.
NSAIDs, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, are
effective analgesics even at doses too low to have any
anti-inflammatory effects. There are a number of chemi-
cal classes, but all have similar therapeutic effects and
side effects. Most are appropriate only for oral adminis-
tration; however ketorolac (Toradol) is appropriate for
injection and may be used in moderate to severe pain for
short periods.
Acetaminophen is a non-narcotic analgesic with no
anti-inflammatory properties. It is appropriate for mild to
moderate pain. Although the drug is well tolerated in nor-
mal doses, it may have significant toxicity at high doses.
Because acetaminophen is largely free of side effects at
therapeutic doses, it has been considered the first choice
for mild pain, including that of osteoarthritis.
Recommended dosage
Appropriate dosage varies by drug, and should con-
sider the type of pain, as well as other risks associated
G A L E E N C Y C L O P E D I A O F M E D I C I N E 21 7 4
Analgesics